Freshwater Scaling Docs (#1502)
COSIMA/MOM6-CICE6: documentation/docs/pages/inputs/Forcing-data-models.md

Freshwater fluxes with the data models (DATM and DROF) are separated in ocean, sea ice and land components as follows. 

> - **Precipitation:** precipitation over ocean and sea ice cells are scaled by the sea ice concentration in that cell. Therefore where sea ice covers part of a grid cell, a fraction of precipitation is received by each of the ocean and sea ice components, according to the sea ice concentration in that cell. Precipitation over land is discarded. Precipitation is secondly scaled such that the global freshwater going into the ocean and sea ice system, see [Global Freshwater Balance](#global-freshwater-balance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Precipitation:** precipitation over ocean and sea ice cells are scaled by the sea ice concentration in that cell. Therefore where sea ice covers part of a grid cell, a fraction of precipitation is received by each of the ocean and sea ice components, according to the sea ice concentration in that cell. Precipitation over land is discarded. Precipitation is secondly scaled such that the global freshwater going into the ocean and sea ice system is zero, see [Global Freshwater Balance](#global-freshwater-balance).
```

and the net freshwater flux across the sea ice - ocean interface is `fresh` (MOM6 diagnostic `seaice_melt`).

#### Global Freshwater Balance

For global model configurations, incoming precipitation is scaled such that the global volume of freshwater entering the ocean and sea ice total system is zero.
As the evaporation parameterisations used in the active model components are not consistent with those used in atmosphere and runoff forcing data (JRA55do), 

> a correction is applied to incoming precipitation to prevent drift in the total ocean and sea ice mass. 

Reviewer: I didn't follow that the first part of this sentence leads to the second.

Even if the parameterisations were identical, wouldn't a correction still likely be needed e.g. because the ocean state will be different than what was used in JRA55?

The scaling is applied such that the global sum of runoff, precipitation and evaporation is zero. 
In this parapgrah and diagram below, we use the convention of evaporation to include evaporation, condensation, deposition and sublimation, precipitation to

> include rain and snow and runoff to inclue both river and icesheet runoff.

Reviewer: Hard to parse
```suggestion
In this paragraph and diagram below:
- evaporation includes evaporation, condensation, deposition and sublimation;
- precipitation includes rain and snow; and
- runoff includes both river and ice-sheet runoff.
```

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Having a single box for all CMEPS processes might be clearer? The line going directly from drof to MOM is confusing

Author: Just trying to show that no runoff goes into the sea ice

Author: I've not really figured out how to get mermaid diagrams to align nicely etc

Author: <img width="896" height="439" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/13395177-3455-462d-8244-82d18bacc653" />

---
config:
  theme: redux
  layout: fixed
---
flowchart TB
 subgraph s2["JRA55-do"]
        n1["Runoff (DROF)"]
        n6["Precipitation (DATM)"]
  end
 subgraph s3[" "]
        n2["Ocean (MOM6)"]
        n4["Sea Ice (CICE)"]
  end
 subgraph s6["Mediator - Evaporation"]
        n5["Evaporation (CMEPS and CICE)"]

>         n7["Sea ice evaporation is calcualted in CICE, whilst ocean evaporation is calculated in CMEPS."]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        n7["Sea ice evaporation is calculated in CICE, whilst ocean evaporation is calculated in CMEPS."]
```

  end
 subgraph s7["Mediator - Precipitation"]
        n3["Scaled Precipitation (CMEPS)"]
        n8["Precipitation (from JRA55do) is scaled such that the global sum of runoff, precipitation and evaporation is zero at each timestep."]
  end

    n3 --> n2 & n4
    n4 --> n5
    n2 --> n5
    n6 --> n3
    n5 --> n3
    n1 --> n3
    n1 --> n2

    n1@{ shape: rounded}
    n6@{ shape: rounded}
    n4@{ shape: rect}
    n7@{ shape: text}
    n3@{ shape: rounded}
    n8@{ shape: text}
    style n1 fill:#757575,color:#ffffff
    style n6 color:#ffffff,fill:#757575
    style n4 stroke:#FF6D00
    style n5 fill:#C8E6C9
    style n3 fill:#C8E6C9
    linkStyle 0 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 1 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 2 stroke:#FF6D00,fill:none
    linkStyle 3 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 5 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
```

> The scaling is implemented by including [`med_phases_scalefreshwater_run`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/CMEPS/blob/HEAD/mediator/med_phases_scalefluxes_mod.F90) in 

Reviewer: I think we should mention somewhere that ice evap is one timestep behind in the scaling calculation

  end

    n3 --> n2 & n4
    n4 --> n5
    n2 --> n5
    n6 --> n3
    n5 --> n3
    n1 --> n3

    n1@{ shape: rounded}
    n6@{ shape: rounded}
    n4@{ shape: rect}
    n7@{ shape: text}
    n3@{ shape: rounded}
    n8@{ shape: text}
    style n1 fill:#757575,color:#ffffff
    style n6 color:#ffffff,fill:#757575
    style n4 stroke:#FF6D00
    style n5 fill:#C8E6C9
    style n3 fill:#C8E6C9
    linkStyle 0 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 1 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 2 stroke:#FF6D00,fill:none
    linkStyle 3 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
    linkStyle 5 stroke:#00C853,fill:none
```

The scaling is implemented by including [`med_phases_scalefreshwater_run`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/CMEPS/blob/HEAD/mediator/med_phases_scalefluxes_mod.F90) in 
[`nuopc.runseq`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/commit/200242fdce3c15fc97831d9aa7bdf43f81eb531c#diff-a38027e841650d12250f4828301a4a336a0a3170b80dfaa90ee370455ed36951) and setting the MOM6 option `ADJUST_NET_FRESH_WATER_TO_ZERO` to False.

There's a couple of quirks that mean that the freshwater scaling achieves very close to zero freshwater at each timestep,

> with is a small variation in global ocean mass ( annual variation of approximatly ±1e-6%). This appears to be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, the scaling approach does not achieve exactly zero freshwater at each timestep and there is a small variation in global ocean mass (annual variation of approximately ±1e-6%). This appears to be 
```
